Fierce fighting is continuing in the
Gaza Strip Israel's military says it has
carried out aerial strikes on over 300
Hamas Targets in the past 24 hours these
images show K yunus in the south of the
territory strikes have also been
reported in the north of the Gaza Strip
Hamas appointed officials say scores of
civilians have been
killed let's bring in Ahmed bam here
he's a spokesperson for the Norwegian
Refugee Council joins us from the
Jordanian Capital Aman thanks for being
with us Ahman we're looking at a pause
of at least 4 days here in the fighting
uh in in Gaza how much Aid can
organizations like yours achieve uh how
how much relief can you provide in that
amount of
time good morning Terry um not much the
answer is um we have been even you know
during these you know as we speak we are
delivering eight on the ground very
limited in in our
capacity um in our ability to to move
around shelters we do manage three sites
where we have hundreds of people who
have taken shelter we're providing hot
meals and you know some water for people
and some cash assistance for people uh
this is a fraction of what we can really
do if we have the right conditions
during these four you know four days I
mean this is this is also very little
time for us um just to give you an
example we have have 10 trucks of Aid
that are waiting to be delivered into
Gaza 4 days is not enough given the
administrative uh given the logistical
given the screening that you know the
aid has to go through it's a long
process it has to drive you know a
bottle of water has to travel over 100
kilometers before it can make its way
into Gaza this is very little time for
everyone this is why we are saying 4
days of um you know a pause is is
nowhere near enough we need a long
sustained uh SE Seas fire so our teams
on the ground 50 of them or more at the
Norwegian Refugee Council can go out and
deliver and and provide much needed Aid
to talk to us more about uh delivering
that Aid because uh we can get maybe
aund a few hundred trucks into Gaza
during this uh pause in the fighting but
it has to be distributed what's your
plan for Distributing the aid that does
get into
Gaza yes um as of now we do rely on the
Gaza Market because we hav't managed to
bring in any trucks for the reasons of
I've just given it has been very
complicated and and you know a very low
volume of trucks compared to the actual
meat has been able to pass through what
we need on the ground uh what we plan to
do is to deliver hot um hot meals to
deliver shelter support for people in
shelters blankets mattresses pillows for
The Hundreds who have you know left
their homes with nothing on them uh pure
I mean drinking water as well is a big
challenge we can't do this without the
fuel without um without the guarantees
that our uh you know our Aid workers uh
will be able uh to operate safely not
just us of course everyone else I think
the needs on the on the ground are so
massive you're talking about the heavily
wounded who are you know who are waiting
for treatment for surgeries uh you are
talking about children who are
traumatized by this what we are saying
don't give these children safety so you
only take it away from them in a few
days
keep it safe and keep that ceasefire
going now many organizations and
governments welcome the humanitarian
ceasefire deal of course but uh they're
calling for a longer term solution here
how optimistic are you ammed about
reaching such a solution in this
case um I would say it seems that the
political will has managed to achieve a
breakthrough it looks like pressure has
been exerted on all sides to come to an
agreement to release hostages and to
bring Aid in what what does stop it from
what does stop these you know uh big
powers from achieving a long Seas fire I
think with the right political will we
can come to an agreement um we appeal to
the US to the EU countries and also to
Arab countries in the gulf and to Egypt
to um continue that pressure because
clearly um you know that it has worked
this time um for for you know we have
been able to put civilians interests uh
here but not very long what we need is
that you know these Powers continue to
exert um you know with diplomacy their
pressure on the countries on on Israel
obviously and on the armed groups in
Gaza to agree to a longer ceasefire we
are hopeful we we never lose hope in
humanity um again we saying children
think of children children and think of
their families that the thousands who
have been killed they deserve um you
know they deserve some safety and sense
of morality now Ahmed thank you very
much for talking with us that was Ahmed
Bam from the Norwegian Refugee
Council thank you Israel says it's not
expecting any hostages to be released by
Hamas before Friday the country's
National Security adviser said a deal
with the militant group has been delayed
although the reason why remains unclear
and agreed pause and fighting in Gaza is
also on hold with Qatar who has played a
key role in these negotiations saying an
announcement about the temporary truce
could come within the next few hours
here's the Israeli Prime Minister benam
nany I just spoke with President Biden
again I thanked him for working at my
request with the Brokers to achieve a
significant Improvement of the deal and
indeed such an improvement was achieved
the combination of military efforts and
political effort provided the conditions
for the return of our abdes I believe
this combination will also allow the
release of additional abductees in
future
stages our special correspondent a
Ibrahim in Jerusalem has more on why the
truce and hostage release deal have been
delayed well it seems that it has to do
with logistical issues a White House
spokesperson has said that the final
details are still being worked out um
and we don't have any sort of confirmed
further explanation as to why this delay
important to note that while this delay
is disappointing it's not completely
unexpected officials have been saying
since the beginning of the negotiations
of this deal that this kind of thing is
done only when it's done just because
there are so many moving parts to a deal
like this and so in the grand scheme of
things if the deal actually ends up up
being successfully implemented this
should be a minor uh delay and remember
even if and once the deal hopefully
starts being implemented there could
still be bumps along the road uh uh then
we're not expecting all of the hostages
to be released at once they are indeed
expected to be released in batches
contingent with a 4-day uh ceasefire and
it could happen that one or both parties
for whatever reason violates that cease
fire
H and so we can expect also that this is
not going to be 100%
smooth how important is this deal a for
both the Israeli government and
Hamas hugely important for the Israeli
government that has been coming under
increased pressure and has been indeed
the subject of growing anger at the
perceived lack of uh action to bring
back the hostages since they were taken
on October 7th uh by terrorists um
there's also a sense that that the Prime
Minister himself is sort of was coming
under pressure uh to to to do something
to bring back uh the hostages for Hamas
um this is you know as a as as a
militant fighting group on the ground at
truce gives them perhaps time to uh
regroup which is actually one of the
criticisms of this deal coming from a
very vocal rightwing minority within the
government who were opposed to the deal
saying that it actually plays into
hamas's Advantage because it gives them
time to uh regroup there's also the
people in Gaza who stand to benefit from
the ceasefire as the ceasefire also
means that uh you know hundreds of
trucks of Aid will be coming into the
Strip This is much needed after you know
more than 40 days of near constant uh
bombardment that was DW's special
correspondent a Ibrahim speaking to me
earlier from
Jerusalem well for more let's bring in y
Hilman director of the Middle East and
North Africa program at the
international crisis group thanks for
being with us Yos this ceasefire
agreement has been weeks in the making
walk us through what you know about this
how this tentative deal was
struck good morning Terry yes the deal
um was discussed right almost from the
beginning uh after October 7th once it
became clear that Hamas and other groups
had taken Israeli hostages qat which
hosts uh the political Bureau of Hamas
in Doha immediately uh presented itself
as as a negotiate as a mediator I'm
sorry uh between Hamas and Israel Egypt
has also taken on that role being the
neighboring states to to the Gaza Strip
um but but there were many uh problems
along the way uh one of them was that
uh at one point there was a deal that
was almost in place negotiated by uh the
head of the masat David Bara in in in
Doha uh with with the other side and U
and then the Prime Minister Natan yaho
decided to launch the ground Invasion
and that put that deal to an end so now
we we are many weeks later into uh the
bombardment of Gaza uh and there is now
talk again of a deal I think I think uh
as your correspondent rightly pointed
out uh the Prime Minister has come under
huge pressure uh mounting pressure from
the families of the hostages uh to uh
come to a deal and to implement it uh
and he's going to do it I think uh it's
clear we Face some procedural H hurdles
but nothing or logistical hurdles but
nothing politically serious uh from the
Palestinian side uh the situation is is
beyond desperate uh we've seen now in
the last 24 hours an escalation uh of
the Israeli bombardments in the southern
Gaza Strip where most people have fled
uh with at least 100 people killed just
over the last 24 hours so uh the
situation is is really terrible and
people are desperate for uh a pause that
would allow uh a to come in and for
people to find maybe somehow a safer
place to go to but really frankly there
is no such thing now the outlaw of the
deal uh we have those and it suggests
that 50 prisoners or 50 hostages being
held by Hamas in Gaza would be released
in exchange for about 150 Palestinian
prisoners uh being held in Israeli jails
what do what do you know about those
prisoners who might be released as part
of this
deal I haven't seen uh the list and so I
don't know exactly uh who is going to be
included uded but um Israel has has
hundreds if not thousands of Palestinian
prisoners many of whom uh have been
arrested and and and some in many cases
convicted but there's also many who have
not been
convicted um for uh very minor offenses
and some for very major ones uh all
having to do with the Palestinian
struggle against the military occupation
uh because as you know Palestinians have
been under military occupation for the
last 56 years and are rejecting it so um
but it can be Stone throwing it can be
raising slogans it can be um spitting at
soldiers who are on patrol it can be any
number of things um and of course many
of them are children meaning uh under 18
um who have been uh arrested along with
many women so uh I think this is the
first badge down the line in exchange
for the release of other Israeli
hostages there could be others okay uh y
h from the international crisis group
thank you very much for speaking with us
today thank
you the hostage release delay means the
agonizing weight goes on for the
families of those being held by Hamas
many have maintained constant pressure
on benimi netanyahu's government to make
sure that the release of the loved ones
is a main priority DW's Ben fulan
reports from Tel Aviv where some
relatives are holding a permanent
vigil this has become known as hostage
Square in downtown Tel
[Applause]
Aviv a place of prayer and hope that
this first partial hostage deal happens
I have hope and I don't have hope the
same size because I don't trust ramas I
don't trust as long as we get a few I
mean it's better than none and the that
tiny certainty of life and people coming
back I think is a huge signature of Hope
and is a huge gain for us um but it's
it's horrifying that it's not
everyone women and children only as one
of the young men captured Alon Orel
won't be coming home yet his mother set
up this piano on the Square music is
part of his life he's been playing for
from when he was 9 years
old what's that feeling like um having
people down here every day playing the
piano for your son it's amazing it gives
us a lot of hope it's a hard time it's
not it's not
easy a symbol of the agonizing weight an
empty banquet table for the 240
hostages in every part of the square
reminders of the struggle to get them
all home
the message too from the Israel
ballet we want them
back want the people back as soon as
[Music]
possible well as we wait for the hostage
release deal to be implemented Israeli
media are reporting that an agreed pause
in the fighting in Gaza has also been
delayed I spoke to Mike Martin a former
British off army officer and Senior
fellow at the department of War studies
in King's College London I asked him
about how difficult it is to arrange
such
deals it's super complicated I mean you
need three things really uh both sides
obviously need to want to come to a deal
and it's taken actually some time uh
with this particular deal for both sides
to want to be in that place you need an
intermediary and interlocutor who's
trusted enough by both sides to conduct
that diplomacy initially shuttling
between the two sides and I think that
highlights the importance of Qatar here
and then of course you need once the
deal is going through you need someone
to watch it and make sure that the the
terms are verified so as you say very
complicated to get those three
conditions in
place from a military point of view how
complex is an exchange of hostages and
prisoners which this deal
foresees again very complicated and you
you know you just said in your package
there that that the deal's been delayed
the concerns that I would have would be
around spoilers to the deal so you've
arranged this deal you're going to have
a ceasefire and you're going to trade
prisoners but there will be people I'm
thinking particularly on the hammer side
who don't actually want to ceas fire
perhaps they've lost someone they've
been fighting with and and they are just
they want to Scupper that deal there are
also other factions within Gaza so
Palestinian Islamic Jihad no mention has
been made of them whether they were
party to this deal so they may not want
a deal either so the big problem now
that we move into the implementation
phase is actually about stopping other
parties who either deliberately or or by
accident want to Scupper that deal and
they start uh the hostilities again yeah
important point to keep in mind that
there are other parties involved here
the Israelis uh have previously rejected
calls for a truce claiming it would only
benefit Hamas are they still concerned
Mike that Hamas could exploit a truce
for their own
Advantage very much so and and I think
they've got good cause to so one of the
points of contention in the negotiations
was whether the Israelis would be
allowed to continue overflying Gaza so
Hamas wanted a stop to all or a pause
during the ceasefire to all Israeli
overflights and so of course the fear is
that uh Hamas will use this period to
restock rearm move supplies around get
rockets in position ready to go again
once the pause comes to an end so I
think that is a valid fear of the
Israelis now Israel's prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu says the war against
Hamas is not over despite this deal
should we expect the Israeli military
then to Simply pick up where it left off
when the anticipated truce is
over you know Terry I wouldn't be so
sure here because uh pauses have a
tendency to become ceasefires and
ceasefires have a tendency to become
longer ceasefires both sides you know
Hamas have said that their finger is on
the trigger and Israel says they're
going to go again but actually we've
already seen
we haven't even started swapping or
returning the hostages and already it's
been delayed by a day so one assumes the
ceasefire is going to be a day longer at
the other end and what the pa in
fighting allows both sides to do is to
sit back and look at what's happening
and say actually maybe this fighting
isn't achieving the political goals that
we want it to so perhaps we could use
this pause and allow it to develop into
a longer ceasefire but of course we
shall have to see Mike thank you so much
that was Mike Martins a senior fellow at
Kings College
London